# DORA Asia-Pacific funder group on lotteries for funding

Title: Using lotteries to increase fairness and efficiency in research assessment

Abstract: Research funding is usually awarded through competitive schemes in which individuals or teams compete to get their ideas funded from a limited pool of funding. Peer reviewers are given the difficult task of predicting which ideas will be the most successful. With many applicants and long application forms, this can be an exhausting and likely impossible task. Some reviewers may unconsciously use unhelpful information, such as researchers' metrics or the prestige of their institution. This competitive system is also costly, as applicants and reviewers invest large amounts of time with opportunity costs for those who are unsuccessful. Using lotteries in place of the current system has long been discussed but has only recently been tried. Applications still go through peer review, but only to assess them as meritorious or not, rather than trying to score every application. Applications judged as equally meritorious are then awarded funding at random. This system has potential benefits for efficiency and fairness. It might reduce the influence of unconscious biases and be more acceptable to applicants. When the British Academy switched to a conditional lottery, they received more applications with a greater increase from non-white applicants. Lotteries might also create faster scientific breakthroughs as truly novel ideas are more likely to be put forward by researchers and more likely to be funded.

Slides are [here](https://agbarnett.github.io/talks/DORA/slides).
