# Talk for Statistics, Epidemiology, Economics, Data Analytics Support (SEEDS) Seminar

Title: Does statistical expertise matter?

Abstract: Statistics is a challenging subject that requires training and expertise to do competently. There are common pitfalls and misconceptions that are frequently repeated in published papers. Many journals struggle to find qualified statistical reviews and so bad practice has taken a foothold in some fields, even becoming the new normal. Software is available to help researchers do their own statistics, but no software warns researchers when they use the wrong method or when their research question is flawed. Most researchers publish results without stress-testing their models or checking important assumptions. Statistics as a field is being marginalised by a dwindling critical mass and the growth of data science and machine learning - even though these "new" fields rely heavily on statistics. The lack of qualified statistical help means researchers turn to other fields or the internet for advice, with potentially harmful consequences. The field of sports medicine even invented a totally new way of doing statistics that did not involve statisticians, had little theoretical basis, and has created many false positive findings. Many Australian health and medical ethical committees do not have access to statisticians, but some committees are unworried by this as they can call on epidemiologists, psychologists or clinicians with "a working knowledge" of statistics. I will examine some of the consequences of the waning influence of statistics in research and discuss some potential interventions to raise the profile of statistics. 

Slides are [here](https://agbarnett.github.io/talks/seeds/slides).
